                                                                    THE CODE OF ETHICS
 
The code of ethics is based on following ethical values and professional principles: -
1. Respect and dignity: - To acknowledge, value & appreciate the worth of all patient
2. Respect for patient autonomy: - To respect a patient or SDM.
3. Beneficence: -To provide benefit to the patient.
4. Non-maleficence: - To do no harm to patient.
5. Responsibility: - To be reliable & dependable
6. Trustworthiness and integrity: - To be honest & to be trusted.
7. Professionalism: - To be a good citizen/ member in good standing of the professional association.
 
A:- RESPONSIBILITIES TO THE PATIENT/CLIENT:-
1. Demonstrate sensitivity toward individual patients, respecting and taking into                      consideration their unique rights, needs, beliefs, values, culture, goals, and the environmental context.
2. Act in a respectful manner, and do not refuse care or treatment to any patient on the prohibited grounds of discrimination (race, age, gender, sexual orientation & health status.)
3. Maintain professional boundaries that honour and respect the therapeutic relationship with patients
4. Communicate openly, honestly, and respectfully with patients at all times.
5. Respect the principles of informed consent, including by explaining service options, risks, benefits, potential outcomes, possible consequences of refusing treatment or services, and by avoiding coercion.
6. Treat patients only when the diagnosis or continuation of the intervention warrants treatment and is not contraindicated.
7. Respect and support the autonomy of the patient to participate in the management and decision-making relating to their own health.
8. Provide an alternative treatment option through referral to another health-care provider/ physiotherapist, if the therapeutic relationship is compromised.
9. Respect the confidentiality, privacy, and security of patient information in all forms of communication.
10. Practise in a safe, competent, accountable, and responsible manner within their individual scope of practice.
11. Take responsibility for the patient care delegated to students, PT assistants and other members of the health-care team.
12. Practise the profession of physiotherapy, according to their own competence and limitations, referring the patient to others, as necessary.
13. Practise collaboratively with colleagues, other health professionals, and agencies for the benefit of patients.
 

B RESPONSIBILITIES TO SOCIETY: -

1. Earn the respect of society, the profession, and other health professions through their conduct.
2. Recognize their responsibility to improve the standards of heath care and the wellbeing of society.
3. Be professionally and morally responsible for addressing incompetent, unsafe, illegal, or unethical practice of any health-care provider and be legally responsible for reporting to the appropriate authority/authorities conduct that puts the patient at risk. 
4. commit to maintain & enhancing the reputation & standing of the physiotherapy profession and to fulfilling the broader social responsibilities that their physiotherapy role places on them.
C RESPONSIBILITIES TO THE PROFESSION: -

1. Commit to maintaining and enhancing the reputation and standing of the physiotherapy profession, and to inspiring public trust and confidence by treating everyone with dignity and respect in all interactions.
2. Recognize the responsibility to share evidence-informed and clinical best practices in physiotherapy with one another and other health-care professionals.
3. Strive for excellence in whatever role/ area in which they practice.
4. Accept responsibility for upholding the integrity of the profession and act with integrity in all professional activities.
5. Enhance their expertise through lifelong acquisition and refinement of knowledge, skills, abilities & professional behaviours.
 
QUESTIONS
A:- During a routine visit of PT in SNF ,PT was treating a patient with recent stroke. While doing an upper extremity ROM assessment, PT noticed the patient leg was swollen & red. Later on, patient also informed that he is not out of the bed since the admission due to extreme fatigue. PT immediately informed the nurse & his physician about the condition also paused his evaluation for that day. What was the possible reason behind the PT rational?
1:- Autonomy
2:- Beneficence
3:- Non-malfeasance
4:- Justice
 
B:-A COPD patient came to outpatient clinic for general conditioning program after a recent flare of symptoms. Patient had a history of smoking since 30 years & 55 packs of a year. He also getting frequent infection in his lungs due to the same. After evaluation, PT explained the pros & cons of smoking if not quit ASAP. Since his condition is declining every year, PT recommended smoking cessation and also offered him handouts if needed any. But patient said, he is aware of what he is doing but do not want to quit smoking. Therapist supported his decision even after knowing the consequences.
1:- Autonomy
2:- Beneficence
3:-Non-malfeasance
4:-Justice
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment, Diagnosis, Treatment Standard
The physiotherapist demonstrates proficiency in patient assessment, diagnosis, and treatments to deliver quality, safe, patient-centered physiotherapy services.
 
Performance expectations
• Physiotherapists must Obtains patients’ ongoing informed consent to proposed physiotherapy services.
• Use standardized measures as available to assess and reassess the patient’s condition and progress
• Uses critical thinking and professional judgment to interpret the assessment findings and determine a diagnosis and prognosis consistent with the scope of practice of the physiotherapy profession and the physiotherapist’s individual competence
• Assigns appropriate tasks to pt aid and pta
• Addresses patient’s physiotherapy needs and goals by employing professional judgment to develop sensible and practical treatment plans that are consistent with the assessment findings with patients’ consent.
• Adjusts and/or discontinues physiotherapy services that are no longer required or effective
• Makes appropriate referrals when patients’ needs are best addressed in collaboration with or by another provider
• Delivers only those physiotherapy services that are clinically indicated for patients and that they are competently able to provide.
 
 
 
 
Titles, Credentials and Specialty Designation Standard1
 
• Physiotherapists use title to identify themselves to patient and other health care providers
• Patient expect Physiotherapist to use this title clearly, verifiably and accurately
• Physiotherapist is a legal title anyone without registration of college cannot use this title
• Physiotherapist do not assist any ‘Non registered person calling them Physiotherapist’
• Physiotherapist is obliged to report such person to college ASAP
• Independent practice Certificate holder can use following after their name
o Physiotherapist (equivalent French term)
o Physical Therapist
o PT
• Provisional certificate holder can use following after their name
o Resident Physiotherapist
o Physical Therapist (Emergency Class)
o PT (Emergency Class)
• Use of academic and other credentials:
o Must not use Doctor or Dr. Prefix (even if PT has doctorate level education) while providing Care to a patient
o Can use Dr. in non-clinical setting such as research however in designation format after restricted title
o Must not use any other restricted title (Acupuncturist) unless registered with respective regulatory body
o CANNOT USE TITLE PHYSIOTHERAPIST/PT WHEN PROVIDING CARE TO ANIMALS
o Must not use word ‘Specialist’ unless
▪ Special designation
▪ Designation included in Public Register
▪ Designation then listed AFTER protected title
• Title on Business card should be
o Name then restricted title then formal education
o Eg: John Doe, PT, MPT, DPT
 
References:
1.https://www.collegept.org/rules-and-resources/titles-credentials-specialty-designations-standard
2.https://www.collegept.org/case-of-the-month/post/case-of-the-month/2023/06/20/patient-safety-first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication Standard
(effective August 1, 2024)
 
Standard
The physiotherapist communicates professionally, clearly, effectively, and in a timely manner to support and promote quality physiotherapy services.
Expected outcome
Patients, potential patients, colleagues, members of the public, and others can expect that communication with and by the physiotherapist will be respectful and professional and will contribute to their understanding and/or participation in their health management.
Performance expectations
The physiotherapist:
• Does not engage in communication that is disrespectful, dishonest, misleading or lacking in transparency.
• Identifies potential barriers to effective communication and makes a reasonable effort to address these barriers.
• Engages in active listening to ensure that the patient’s perspective, needs, and preferences are heard and understood. 
• Communicates with patients, team members, and others to facilitate collaboration and coordinate care.
• When sharing information with the patient, team members and others regarding the patient and physiotherapy services:
o Obtains patient consent when required by privacy legislation, and 
o Maintains patient confidentiality by selecting secure methods of communication.
• Documents all communications accurately, clearly, professionally, and in a timely manner.
• Confirms that any exchanges using electronic communications are appropriate for therapeutic relationships established with patients.
• When using social media platforms, communicates with patients, potential patients, members of the public, and others honestly, transparently, and professionally: 
o Obtains explicit informed consent if using patient images or personal information in social media posts.
o Conveys scientifically sound, evidence-informed information.
o Does not share private, disrespectful, dishonest or misleading information.
o Does not provide patient specific treatment recommendations via social media platforms
 
 
 
 
 
 


 


 
 
Good therapeutic communication is associated with the following:
Enhanced ability to obtain consent
Positive patient clinical outcomes
Higher levels of patient satisfaction
Higher levels of satisfaction from your career as a physiotherapist
More meaningful connectiveness with patients
Higher levels of patient adherence to treatment programs
If you don’t listen for the personal information and context behind a patient’s symptoms, you miss important information about how the patient is feeling.
The answer is always with the patient.

When empathy is demonstrated effectively the patient will:
Feel heard and acknowledged
Feel included in the treatment plan
Understand what is expected of them as a patient
Understand what the physiotherapist will be doing

Note: Patient centered communication is equally important for patients with dementia as it is for patients who are able to communicate effectively.
What techniques does the PT use when communicating with this patient who has dementia?
Recommending a type of exercise that may be familiar to the patient
Maintaining eye contact — the PT looks at the patient to demonstrate including them as much as possible in their health care
Speaking in plain language
Using visual aids, photos and videos to stimulate older memories

Non-verbal communication includes:
Eye contact
Body language — this includes postures and gestures
Facial expressions
Active listening
Organization of the interview and physical space
Use of silence

What is one way the PT uses to learn more information about the patients preferred learning styles?
Avoid jargon or complex clinical terms. Instead use plain language that the patient will understand and be sure to speak directly to the patient even if they have a family member or interpreter present. Remember that the information you are providing will help the patient make informed decisions about their care, so it’s important that they understand what you’re saying.
If the patient is sitting, you should sit in a chair across from them, or beside them. You should avoid standing over the patient during an interview if it’s reasonable to do so.

Patients often give non-verbal information about their pain or discomfort level by how they hold themselves, grimace or wince with movement.

You should use anatomically correct terms to keep the therapeutic relationship professional and respectful. Avoid using slang or more casual language to describe a patient’s body.
For example: Instead of saying “belly” say “stomach” or “abdomen.”
Scenario:
The physiotherapist asks a patient to lie on their back and perform bridging exercises. While the patient is doing the exercise, the physiotherapist reminds them to “suck their belly in and squeeze their bum tightly to raise the hips.”
The patient didn’t say anything at the time, but later submitted a complaint to the regulatory college, noting that the physiotherapist’s use of casual language made them feel uncomfortable. The physiotherapist was advised that more professional language, such as “pull in your abdomen” and “squeeze your buttocks” would have been more appropriate.
An effective apology contains two parts:
An expression of sympathy and regret, and a statement that the physiotherapist is sorry
An apology shouldn’t include words like negligence, liable, fault, or failed to meet standards.
The physiotherapist knows that their forearm came into contact with the patient’s groin area and that the patient flinched. How might the physiotherapist address the situation?

A. The patient didn’t say anything so the physiotherapist should continue with the treatment.
B. The physiotherapist should hurry and finish the treatment session as they are really stressed about what happened.
C. The physiotherapist should say, “I apologize that my forearm came into contact with your groin area. This was not intentional and I’m sorry. Would you like to stop the session, or should we continue?”
D. The physiotherapist should say, “Sorry I didn’t mean to do that. It was my fault and that was negligent on my part. Let’s stop the session now.”
The correct answer is C.
The physiotherapist should acknowledge what happened, apologize, and ask the patient if they would like to continue the session. The physiotherapist should also document the incident and their response in the patient’s chart.
Maintaining Boundaries: A Common Theme in Complaints:
The physiotherapist’s communication style is often identified as a main factor in the concerns, and patients report feeling uncomfortable or uneasy.
1) Lack of clarity: Physiotherapists fail to communicate in a clear and understandable manner. This includes using clinical jargon that the patient doesn’t understand, speaking too quickly, not taking the time to get informed consent for the clinical touch or a proposed treatment. Often the patient reports they were not made aware of, or they did not understand, the consequences of receiving the treatment. (The physiotherapist says: “You had a CABG procedure yesterday and now I need to oscillate your chest.”)
2) Poor active listening: Patients feel that physiotherapists do not actively listen to their concerns or questions. Physiotherapists interrupt them often and early in their interactions, physiotherapists appear distracted, or they dismiss the patient’s worries without addressing them adequately. (The physiotherapist interrupts the patient and checks their phone several times during the 15-minute physiotherapy session.)
3) Lack of empathy: Patients value empathy and compassion in their interactions. Patient concerns can arise when physiotherapists do not actively try to put patients at ease. (The physiotherapist says to a patient with chronic pain: “The pain is all in your head. You just need to move more.”)
4) Insufficient time: Patients express frustration when physiotherapists appear rushed or do not allocate enough time (or explain the time available) for appointments. This can lead to patients feeling unheard and not having their concerns adequately addressed. (The physiotherapist says: “I have four patients to see before lunch and I’m way behind schedule, we should be able to get through this quickly.”)
5) Not obtaining consent: The physiotherapist does not provide information and allow the patient to ask questions about the proposed care. Patient informed consent is an ethical and a legal requirement in physiotherapy care. Consent and communication go hand-in-hand. The physiotherapist must provide relevant information about the proposed assessment or treatment, including explaining the purpose, risks, and benefits, and any alternative treatment options. The patient should understand the potential consequences of not receiving care. (The physiotherapist has the patient sign a consent form at the beginning of the session and there are no further conversations about the proposed care.)
6) Involving others in Physiotherapy care: The physiotherapist fails to communicate to the patient the role of the physiotherapist assistant (PTA), the risks and benefits, and alternative options. The physiotherapist must explain how they can be contacted should the patient or the PTA have questions. The patient must provide their consent to receive treatment from the PTA, and they can withdraw their consent at any time. (The physiotherapist tells the patient they will have their assistant take care of the treatment today. No further explanation is provided.)
 
It’s your responsibility to maintain the boundaries of the therapeutic relationship to ensure the physical and emotional safety of the patient.
Don’t assume always ask.
Managing Inappropriate Behaviour: Sometimes, maintaining professional boundaries means managing inappropriate patient behaviour.  Regardless of why a patient may act a certain way, it’s important for the physiotherapist to remain professional and respectful. Physiotherapists must be able to maintain professional boundaries at all times and should not have relationships with patients outside of the clinical setting. 
Using patient centred communication strategies can help establish or reset boundaries. 
Advertising Standards:
 
The physiotherapist advertises in a manner that is truthful, accurate, verifiable, not misleading to the public, and in compliance with regulatory requirements.
 
The physiotherapist:
 
• Makes reasonable efforts to confirm that all advertising of physiotherapy services and products is truthful, accurate, and verifiable.
 
• Refrains from using advertising that: −Promotes unnecessary services. − Provides unsubstantiated claims or guarantees of successful results.
 
• Advertises only the physiotherapy services that he/she is competent to perform.
 
•Free services may be offered for the purposes of:
 
- Providing general education or health promotion.
 
- Informing the public about physiotherapy services offered.
 
- Rendering an opinion about the propriety of physiotherapy services for an individual patient.
 
No paid physiotherapy services can occur on the same day as the free services.
Promotion of unnecessary services
 
Pricing issues
The public should be able to find the fees prior to agreeing to treatment and there shouldn’t be any hidden or unexpected costs. If a clinic or therapist chooses to offer discounts to students, seniors, or other user groups then it must apply to everyone who is a member of that group and should be documented on the fee schedule for all patients to see.
 
Prizes
Prizes and gifts are also expressly prohibited, because they serve as an inducement for unnecessary services. “Refer a friend for a chance to win…” or “come in today to be entered for our draw” type advertisements clearly offer an inducement to purchase services. It can also be argued that these types of advertisements belong in a retail environment, not a professional one. That’s where the Code of Ethical Conduct3 comes in.
Whether we are talking to the public face to face or through online means we should always look to meet and exceed expectations regarding professional conduct. So, the next time you’re looking at an advertisement for your physiotherapy services, ask yourself if you can honestly say that you’ve met these expectations.
.
 
Inducements: 
No, you can’t offer inducements of any kind. There should be no giveaways or prizes for people to access services at your practice or to even get them in the door. Patients should access services because they need to and not to obtain a prize.
Discounts: No, you cannot offer 10% off services for the Month of July as that is a time-limited price. But you can offer discounts that aren’t time limited such as special pricing for a specific group of patients. It’s important to remember that what you decide to offer in the form of a discount to one patient should apply to everyone in that group. For example, a discount for one senior should apply to all seniors. There are no restrictions as to which groups of people you offer discounts to (seniors, students, members of certain teams, etc.) as long as it is done consistently. It is also important to note that clinic fees and discounts must be clearly displayed for all to see. All patients accessing the clinic should know the discounts available and should be able to advocate to receive those discounts that apply to them.
 
Patient testimonials: 
Yes, you can use patient testimonials. Like any other form of advertising the testimonial must meet the expectations in the Standards of Practice and the Code of Ethical Conduct. People are free to write reviews online about your services but just because someone wrote one doesn’t mean it is appropriate to display in your advertising. Clinics and physiotherapists must make the decision as to whether a testimonial they put into advertising meets the expectations set out by the College. I have listed an example of an appropriate testimonial and an inappropriate testimonial.
 
Appropriate: “I saw Sean after I hurt my knee playing soccer. He was friendly, professional and I felt he listened to what I had to say and my concerns with getting back to playing soccer this winter”
 
Inappropriate: “Sean is THE BEST PHYSIO in the city. I would highly recommend getting shockwave therapy for any pain you have; my pain was gone after three sessions. Much better than Leanne, who I saw at Leanne Physio down the street!”
 
 
Google reviews will drive an organization’s position within Google searches and having prime search engine optimization is a key part of advertising. However, your interaction with online reviews must maintain a level of professionalism and you need to be careful not to elicit reviews from patients. Physiotherapists at no time should be coercing patients to leave positive online reviews as it can have a negative impact on the patient relationship. You can read more specifically on that in a previous article here.
 
Superlative statements:
No, you cannot use statements like “Best Physiotherapy Clinic in Edmonton”. .
 
 
 
Misuse of Title:
Whether you have a PhD or a DPT you cannot refer to yourself as a “doctor” in your clinical practice. You are a physiotherapist and must present yourself as such. You are not a “medical doctor” and telling patients in a health-care setting that you are a “doctor” misleads the public in terms of your education and services you can provide. Yes, you can use your academic credential, but it must come after your professional title, and you need to be clear what it means when you tell your patient or a member of the public.
.
Free Assessments/screens:
The Old Bait and Switch! You advertise to the public that they can come in for a free foot assessment and when they show up, they get a five-minute screen and get told they need orthotics for a cost of $500. These tactics are unethical and mislead the public and should rightly be prohibited.
Free services may be offered for the purposes of:
 
● Providing general education or health promotion
● Informing the public about physiotherapy services offered
● Rendering an opinion about the propriety of physiotherapy services for an individual patient
 
Guaranteeing results:
I recently saw on a clinic’s website the statement that “We successfully treat your chronic pain condition, even if you have given up any hope that you could find relief.” Physiotherapy is great for many things but there are no guarantees of success. Wording your advertising to guarantee success both contravene the Standards of Practice and the Code of Ethical Conduct. You can give educated opinions after assessing the patient on their prognosis, but you cannot provide a statement of results to a sub-group of the population or make unsubstantiated claims of success to the public.
 
 
Evidence-Informed Practice Standard
 
Evidence-informed practice means using evidence to design, implement and improve the Physiotherapy service we provide. 
Patients can expect from us the best available treatment option, which a PT designs by personal knowledge, training, and experience and is best for the patient.
Critically evaluate the practice setting, population, treatment and evaluation options and have the evidence to support the service you provide. 
Add the treatment and assessment plan which is evidence-based. 
Patient-centred care- think critically and professionally evaluate patients' outcomes and modify treatment approaches as needed. 
 
# Regarding the use of emerging or complementary therapies, the physiotherapist:
-Before adding any new therapy into service a PT should
- Related legislative and regulatory considerations.
- Should be evidence-based practice and standard of care should also be maintained
- Should have proper skills, knowledge and judgement for the new practice.
# Communicate with patients about the new services and complementary therapies. 
# Talk to them about the evidence about the new services and take informed consent
# Offer them alternative treatments too.
 
Q. Which of the following best reflects the principles of evidence-informed practice in physiotherapy?
    A) Relying solely on clinical expertise and patient preferences when deciding on treatment
     B) Using research evidence without considering the patient's values and clinical context
     C) Integrating clinical expertise, patient preferences, and the best available research evidence
     D) Applying only high-level randomized controlled trials (RCTs) for all clinical decisions 
 
 
Q. Which of the following actions demonstrates a physiotherapist's adherence to evidence-informed practice?
A) Selecting treatments that have been traditionally used in physiotherapy without reviewing current research
B) Regularly updating their knowledge by reviewing new scientific evidence and applying it to practice
C) Prioritizing patient preferences over scientific evidence when they conflict
D) Treating all patients using the same protocol without adjusting for individual needs or new research
 
 
Q. A Physiotherapist is working with a patient who has low back pain. According to the principles of evidence-informed practice, what is the first step the physiotherapist should take when selecting a treatment plan?
A) Researching the latest treatment guidelines and evidence for low back pain
B) Relying on their past experiences treating similar cases
C) Asking the patient what treatment they would prefer
D) Selecting the treatment based on what is most convenient for the clinic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Collaborative Practice
 
Physiotherapists must collaborate with the patient and others involved in the patient’s care when its relevant to the patient’s physiotherapy plan of care.
 • Patient collaboration:
● Physiotherapists must work with the patient to create a plan of care that addresses the goals and needs of the patient.  
● Physiotherapists must ensure the patient understands their own role and how they, themselves, can contribute to the plan.  
● Physiotherapists must help the patient make informed decisions regarding their care.
● Physiotherapists must respect the patient’s decision about his or her own plan of care including treatments received and who provides that care.
 
Other health care practitioner collaboration:
● Physiotherapists must make the appropriate referral if the patient requires services from another provider.  
● Physiotherapists must understand what treatments each service provider is providing by liaising with the other health care providers and/or the patient.  
If any issues arise during collaborative care (e.g. patient behaviour issues, adverse treatment outcomes) then the physiotherapist must take reasonable steps to resolve the issues. This could include:
● Open discussions with the patient and other health care practitioners involved in care. o Arise at a resolution to the problem as a team.
● Document the situation and steps taken.
 
 
 
 
Conflict of Interest
 
A conflict of interest is a breach of an obligation to one's professional ethics which has the effect, or intention, of advancing one's own interest or the interest of others in a way detrimental to the interest of the client, or potentially harmful to the integrity of the physical therapy profession.  A conflict of interest arises when a physical therapist's actions or decisions may reasonably be perceived to be, or are in fact, motivated or influenced by financial gain or the potential for financial gain. A physical therapist shall not render service in any situation that will compromise his/her professional integrity, standard of practice, or place him/her in a conflict of interest. Conflicts of interest and the appearance of conflicts of interest must be avoided.  The physical therapist's professional duty is owed to the client, regardless of who pays for the physical therapy services. All decisions regarding the client must be made in the client's best interest and with the client's full knowledge.
Physiotherapists must recognize and manage situations that may result in a real, potential, or perceived conflict of interest.
If it is not possible to avoid a conflict of interest, physiotherapists must:  
● Disclose and discuss the situation with the patient before providing services. o Make the patient aware of practical alternatives if there are any.
● Document the discussion in the patient’s records.
 
If the physiotherapist suggests a product or service in which they or their relative/friend has a financial interest, then the physiotherapist must:  
● Disclose the nature of the financial interest to the patient in advance.
● Make the patient aware of any practical alternative sources for the product or service. o Assure the patient that if they choose an alternate supplier/service, it will not adversely affect their care.
● Document the discussion in the patient’s record. Physiotherapists must not give any benefit to another person or receive any benefit from another person for a patient referral.  Referrals should be based on patient need. When making a referral, make the patient aware of a range of practical alternatives/options.
 
 
 
 
 
Before Leaving a Job or Taking Leave
 
1. Notify Employer: Remind them that your name and registration number can’t used for billing after you leave.
2. Plan for Patient Care: • Ensure ongoing care for patients and stop PTAs from providing care unless another physiotherapist agrees to supervise. • Ensure patient records are up to date, including insurance details.
3. Notify College: Inform the College of your leave or job change within 30 days.
 
 
Case Scenario 1 (Maternity Leave):
• Wrong Action: Not notifying the College because the registration status hasn’t changed.
• Correct Action: Notify the College of any employment status change, even for temporary leave.
 
Case Scenario 2 (Suspended License Due to Privacy Breach):
• Fault: The PT, admin department, and clinic owners are all at fault for using another physiotherapist’s registration number to bill. This should be reported immediately to the College.
 
Case Scenario 3 (Maternity Leave Return, No College Reinstatement):
• Ineligible to Practice: The PT cannot practice until their registration is reactivated with the College, even if they are a member of the CPA. CPA membership is optional, College registration is mandatory.
 
 
 
Insurance
 
Practicing physiotherapists must have liability insurance. Liability insurance provides financial compensation for people who have been harmed as a result of malpractice or negligence by a professional·
• Physiotherapists must be registered with their provincial College.
o The registration number:
▪ Stays with the physiotherapist throughout their career.
▪ Identifies the individual as a registered physiotherapist.
▪ Is used for billing purposes.
o To register with the College, you need liability insurance.
▪ Lability insurance may be covered by an employer or it may be the physiotherapists responsibility to arrange and pay for this themselves.
▪ Physiotherapists who work in multiple practice environments (at many clinics and/or hospitals), cannot assume their insurance at one location covers them for other practice environments.
▪ Physiotherapists must be able to provide proof of coverage within 30 days if this has been requested by their provincial College.
• A registrant must update their registrant profile with the college, including but not limited to any change of home and/or business address, name, home and/or business telephone number and/or email address, and any other registration information previously provided to the registrar.
• If going on maternity, parental, or extended leave, a PT must update the College. If going on leave, there are 2 options:
o If not planning to use PT title during this time (I.e., not practice as a PT), the PT can resign their registration for the time they are planning to be off.
▪ Need to let the College know by logging into online profile on College website and changing information. A credit for registration time remaining will be paid out.
o Option to remain registered.
▪ Must let College know by updating information online and must include:
• Last date at work.
• Updated contact details so the College can reach PT during absence if necessary, for updates (such as updates to practice standards, annual renewal information etc.).
o When returning from maternity, parental or extended leave, the PT needs to contact the College at least two weeks before returning to work to complete the necessary documentation.
• Insurance coverage is needed when taking a leave even if a PT is not practicing.
 
 
 
 
Case Scenario
Scenario 1:
A PT at a private practice clinic had his license suspended due to repeated privacy breaches. This PT was the main financial support for his family and brought in the greatest amount of revenue for the clinic. After a long talk with the clinic owner, it was decided that the PT could continue to practice as long as he followed all privacy regulations. In order to bill, they had the admin department use the owners name and registration number when billing. Patients were not notified that the PT was under suspension.
Who is at fault here?
• Everyone involved - the PT, the owner, and the administration department.
• The PT cannot work as a PT with a suspended licence. There is no flexibility or exceptions here at all.
• This should be reported immediately to the College.
 
Scenario 2:
A PT returning from their maternity leave forgets to contact the College and re-instate their registration to active. They are, however, a member of the Canadian Physiotherapy Association (CPA).
Are they able to practice?
• No. PT's practicing in Canada must be registered with their provincial College and the registration must be in an active registration/member status.
• It is optional to be a member of CPA - it is not mandatory.
 
 
Cases-
1.John works in a hospital. John’s manager says that the hospital’s insurance protects them. Why does John need to buy professional liability insurance?
As a regulated member, John has a permit to practice anywhere in Alberta, in any sector or setting, 24 hours a day and 7 days a week. By tying the professional liability insurance requirement to John’s practice permit, the College of Physiotherapists of Alberta ensures that John has professional liability insurance in place when providing services:
• At their primary place of employment
• At any secondary employment locations if they change employment sectors mid-year (e.g., to take a role in private practice)
• If they engage in volunteer activities related to physiotherapy
Personally carrying professional liability insurance also ensures that coverage is in place if John’s employer were to disavow John’s actions or refuse to provide coverage for an incident occurring in the workplace that the employer deemed to be outside of John’s role or approved activities.
 
 
2.Camilla purchases their personal professional liability insurance through a company whose policy year is July 1- June 30. When Camilla renewed their practice permit on September 5th, they realized that their insurance policy had lapsed on June 30th. They renewed their policy as soon as they realized the mistake, but their new insurance policy indicates the day when Camilla renewed and that there was a lapse in their professional liability coverage.
This is a problem. Like all regulated physiotherapists in Alberta, Camilla is required to personally hold continuous professional liability insurance regardless of the start and end dates of their professional liability insurance policy.
Camilla has placed themself and the College in a precarious position. The College of Physiotherapists of Alberta would have difficulty explaining Camilla’s actions to a patient or other party if a concern or complaint were to arise. Camilla’s gap in coverage also means that they do not have protection for any errors, omissions or instances of malpractice arising between July 1 to September 5, which may not come to light for months or even years.
As this was the first time Camilla made this mistake, the College used one of its regulatory tools and issued a reprimand to Camilla. The reprimand stays on Camilla’s record. If Camilla fails to meet the professional liability insurance requirement a second time this would warrant a referral to the complaints director.
 
 
 
3.Kenji renewed their practice permit in August. On September 20th they renewed their personal professional liability insurance. Unlike Camilla they did not have a lapse in coverage.
Kenji was surprised that they were contacted by the College following the annual insurance audit. They were advised that they are required to have personal professional liability insurance coverage effective October 1st in place BEFORE renewing their practice permit.
The Physical Therapists Profession Regulation requires that physiotherapists provide evidence of having the type and amount of professional liability insurance required by Council as a condition of registration or practice permit renewal.
Kenji’s renewed practice permit term will begin on October 1st. Kenji is required to provide evidence of having liability insurance in effect on that date as a condition of renewal. Kenji provides that evidence by submitting their policy number to the College at the time of submitting their renewal application. To comply with College requirements and avoid making a false declaration to the College, Kenji needed to purchase their personal professional liability insurance before submitting their application for renewal.
If, like Kenji, your insurance period starts October 1 and ends September 30, you still need to purchase your professional liability insurance before you renew, regardless of the date you choose to renew your practice permit.
 
 
4.Erin owns a small physiotherapy business that includes both a clinic site and a mobile practice. Erin holds commercial general liability Insurance. Erin was surprised when they were contacted by the College following the annual insurance audit and advised that they did not have the proper insurance in place.
Commercial general liability is not the same as professional liability insurance. Commercial general liability is not proof of individual professional liability insurance for professional registration purposes.
Erin’s commercial general liability is intended to protect Erin against claims arising from injury or property damage that they (or their business or staff) may cause to another person as a result of their business operations and/or premises, but not as a result of the delivery of professional services.
For example, Erin would use their commercial general liability insurance if a patient was injured by slipping in a puddle on the reception floor. Similarly, Erin would access their commercial general liability if they accidentally broke something in a client’s home during a consultation and the client wanted to recover the cost of this from Erin.
In contrast, if Erin were to burn a patient in the course of providing physiotherapy services, they would access their professional liability insurance to provide coverage for Erin’s actions, omissions or malpractice.
 
 
5.Fatima recently found themself in a similar situation to Erin. Fatima was contacted by the College following the annual insurance audit and were advised that they did not have the proper insurance in place. However, in Fatima’s case, they reported that they had sought to purchase professional liability insurance and that the insurer had issued a commercial general liability insurance policy in error.
While in this case the error was made by another party, it is the physiotherapist’s responsibility to ensure they meet the requirements for registration. Physiotherapists are advised to check their insurance policies at the time of purchase and make sure that any errors are corrected without any lapse in their personal professional liability coverage. This is another reason to complete the annual renewal process well in advance of the deadline, and to ensure that professional liability insurance is in place before beginning the renewal process.
 
 
6.Ahmed is getting ready to retire from physiotherapy practice. They called the College wanting to know what professional liability insurance they are required to hold after they retire.
The personal professional liability requirement is directly tied to Ahmed’s registration status with the College of Physiotherapists of Alberta and their annual practice permit. Once Ahmed retires from physiotherapy practice, they are no longer required to hold a practice permit, and will likely cancel their registration. Once that happens, the insurance requirement established by the College no longer applies to them.
However, from a risk management perspective, Ahmed may wish to investigate “extended reporting coverage”, sometimes referred to as “tail coverage”. This coverage provides Ahmed with professional liability insurance if a patient decides to sue them for malpractice after they have left practice and are no longer a regulated member.
Patients have several years to file a claim, so having extended reporting coverage may be of benefit to Ahmed.
 
 
Controlled Act And Restricted Activity
A controlled act is a healthcare activity that can cause harm if a person who is not qualified or skilled performs it.
A restricted activity is a regulated health service that by law can only be performed by individuals authorized to perform them.
Any restricted activities can only be performed by the PT if the PT is rostered or if it has been delegated to him by the other health care provider who is authorized to do so.
 
Activities authorized to all regulated members of the College include: which means they can perform if they are competent , trained and delegated by the supervising PT or by other health professionals. These activities include  :
 
1. Inserting and removing catheters
2. Reducing a dislocation of a joint
3. Suctioning or instillation
4. Wound debridement and care
 
Activities requiring additional authorization from the College include: which means they need special training and education and be registered with the college. These activities cannot be delegated.
 
1. Ordering diagnostic imaging ( Xray, MRI and US imaging)
2. Pelvic Health (Internal Examinations)
3. Performing spinal manipulation
4. Using needles in practice
 
However, PTs must roster for the following activities if they want to perform independently.
1. tracheal suctioning
2. spinal manipulation
3. acupuncture (including dry needling)
4. treating a wound below the dermis
5. pelvic internal exams (this includes putting an instrument, hand or finger, beyond the labia majora, or beyond the anal verge)
6. administering a substance by inhalation
 
Physiotherapists may delegate 3 of the controlled acts they are authorized to perform to a PTA or PT student
 
1. tracheal suctioning
2. Wound care
3. administering a substance by inhalation.
When delegating the task physiotherapist must ensure and document that the person whom they are delegating to has the knowledge , skill and judgement to carry the task safely and ethically.
 
( note : a pta or pt student cannot delegate this task to anybody else)
 
Can a PT who is not rostered for oxygen administration or tracheal suctioning perform the task if its delegated by a physcian ?
Yes, Delegation is a formal transfer of authority and can take place either through a direct order or a medical directive.
Direct orders are when you get the authority to perform a controlled act from another healthcare provider (usually a physician) for a specific client.
 
Can a PT adjust the O2 level?
Yes only under 2 circumstances:
1. PT should be rostered or
2. The task should be delegated to PT by the MD ( Dentist, midwife or nurse practitioner)
 
Can A PT rostered in a controlled act perform the act when his supervisor is not rostered?
No, the PT cannot perform any restricted activity if the supervising PT is not rostered. The supervising PT should also be rostered in the same activity as resident PT, in order for resident PT to perform.
 
? Can A PT  order diagnostic imaging
According to college of Alberta, yes if the PT is registered with the college under the same.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORTING OBLIGATION
 
What Physiotherapists are Legally Required to Report to their College Regulated health professionals, including physiotherapists and those who work with or employ them have legal and ethical obligations to make reports to the College of Physiotherapists of Ontario and other colleges and agencies as required under the Regulated Health Professions Act. What Happens When the College Receives a Report? The Registrar reviews each report that is received along with any information about the physiotherapist that the College may have previously received and assesses the level of risk posed to the public. The Registrar then determines an appropriate regulatory response.
 
REPORTS THAT MUST BE FILLED WITH A REGULATORY COLLEGES
 
1. SEXUAL ABUSE- BY A REGULATED HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
· What to report - If you learn that a physiotherapist or other regulated health care provider may have sexually abused a patient or been engaged in a relationship with a former patient (who was discharged from care within the last year), a report must be filed with the College of the health care provider. - The report must include the name of the provider who may have abused the patient and can only include the name of the patient if the patient has provided their consent.
- Sexual Abuse:
a) sexual intercourse or other forms of physical sexual relations between the registrant and the patient,
b) touching, of a sexual nature, of the patient by the registrant, or
c) behaviour or remarks of a sexual nature by the registrant towards the patient · Who Must Report Physiotherapists • Physiotherapists if they learn of the abuse. • Facility Operators and Employers (Including physiotherapists who operate a facility or workplace where one or more regulated health professional practice). • Any regulated health care provider who becomes aware of a patient being sexually abused by a physiotherapist or another regulated health care provider.
 
 
2. WHEN A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER MAY BE INCAPACITED OR INCOMPETENT :
What to report - A report must be filed with a regulatory College if a physiotherapist or other regulated health care provider may be incompetent or incapacitated, meaning that they are dealing with a health condition that is affecting their ability to provide safe patient care or their lack of knowledge, skills, or judgement is negatively affecting patient care.
 
Who Must Report
• Employers
• Facility Operators (Including physiotherapists who operate a facility where one or more regulated health professional practice).
3. TERMINATION OF EMPLOYEMENT/ RESIGNATION
WHAT to Report:
When a physiotherapist’s (or other regulated health care provider) employment / association with a company is terminated for reasons of professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity. When a physiotherapist (or other regulated health care provider) ends their association with a company while they were in a progressive discipline process, performance enhancement process or facing termination.
 
WHO Must Report
Employers / Facility Operators (Including physiotherapists who employ other physiotherapists) or Organizations with which the PT / regulated health care provider was professionally associated with
 
 
4. HOLDING OUT AS A PHYSIOTHERAPIST
WHAT to Report
If a physiotherapist becomes aware that an individual, including a PTA, is pretending to be a physiotherapist in Ontario.
 
WHO Must Report:
Physiotherapists
 
When to report:
As soon as possible after becoming aware of the information.
 
 
5. OFFENCES-MANDATORY REPORT
WHAT to Report
ALL OFFENCES, including: - Charges under the Criminal Code of Canada (as of July 1, 2015) - Findings under the Criminal Code of Canada (as of July 1, 2015) - Charges under the Health Insurance Act (as of July 1, 2015) - Findings under the Health Insurance Act (as of July 1, 2015) - Charges under the Controlled Drug and Substances Act (as of May 1, 2018) - Findings under the Controlled Drug and Substances Act (as of May 1, 2018) In addition to all bail conditions / court restrictions and changes to bail conditions / court restrictions.
 
WHO Must Report –
Physiotherapists who have been charged or found guilty - This requirement applies to all regulated health care provider in Ontario WHEN to report As soon as possible after the charge or finding in addition to reporting during the annual renewal process.
 
 
 
 
 
6. FINDINGS IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
WHAT to Report
If you hold a certificate of registration with another regulatory body in / outside of Ontario and you go through a hearings process at the conclusion of which there is a finding of professional misconduct, incompetence, or incapacity you must report this information to the College.
 
WHO Must Report
Physiotherapists who have been found guilty of professional misconduct or to be incapacitated or incompetent in another regulated profession / in another jurisdiction. This requirement applies to all regulated health care providers in Ontario.
 
 
 
7. NEGLIGENCE/MALPRACTICE
WHAT to Report
If a physiotherapist has been found guilty of malpractice or negligence in a court of law (settlement agreements are not included) this must be reported to the College.
 
WHO Must Report
Physiotherapists who have been charged or found guilty must report this information to the College. This requirement applies to all regulated health care providers in Ontario.
 
 
8. PRIVACY BREACHES
WHAT to Report
Where a PT has been disciplined, suspended, had their employment terminated or a business affiliation with a PT has ended because of unauthorized collection, use, disclosure, retention, or disposal of personal health information. OR The physiotherapist resigns because of these concerns. OR There are events that led to a loss or unauthorized use or disclosure of personal health information by a physiotherapist.
 
WHO Must Report
Health Information Custodians (Including physiotherapists who are HICs)
 
WHERE to Report
Reports about physiotherapists can be made to the College and the report must be made to the Information and Privacy Commissioner.
 
WHEN to Report
Within 30 days of the disciplinary action, resignation or disclosure taking place
 
 
 
REPORTS REQUIRED BY OTHER ORGANIZATIONS
 
1.CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT
 
What to report
Who must
Report
Where to report
When to report
A suspicion that a child is or may need protection
Physiotherapist
Children’s Aid Society (CAS)
Immediately
 
MANDATORY REPORT:
Age: 15 or under
consent: request consent
Report even if consent denied.
 
Non-mandatory report:
Age: 16 or higher
Consent: request consent
if consent denied do not report (share helpline number)
 
2. ABUSE OR NEGLECT IN LONG-TERM CARE OR RETIREMENT HOMES
 
What to report
Who must
report
Where to report
When to report
A suspicion that a resident has suffered harm or is at risk or may be harmed due to improper or incompetent treatment or care, unlawful conduct, abuse, or neglect
Physiotherapist
1. The registrar of the retirement homes regulatory authority 2. Director- Ministry of health and long-term care
Immediately
 
Known or suspected abuse of a dependent adult (e.g. resident in a seniors home, adult with cognitive delay, post CVA who cannot manage their own ADL's).
If a patient is dependent on those around them for care due to physical or cognitive issues, it is mandatory to report this to the proper authorities.
 
Report to the registrar of the retirement homes regulatory authority
 
 
 
3.PRIVACY BREACH : REPORTS TO AFFECTED PERSON
 
WHAT to REPORT:
Including the unauthorized use or disclosure of personal information or the loss or theft of personal health information.
- The report must inform the affected person of their right to make a complaint to the Information and Privacy Commissioner of Ontario.
 
WHO Must Report: Health Information Custodians (Including physiotherapists who are HICs).
 
WHERE to Report: The person whose information is affected. When to Report: At the first reasonable opportunity
 
 
 
4.PRIVACY BREACHED: REPORTING TO INFORMATION AND PRIVACY COMMISSIONER
WHAT to Report
Belief that personal health information was: - used or disclosed without authority - stolen; - will be further used or disclosed without authority; - lost or there was unauthorized use of personal health information that is part of a pattern of similar conduct; - whether the loss or unauthorized use or disclosure of personal health information is significant
 
WHO Must Report
Health Information Custodians (Including physiotherapists who are HICs).
 
WHERE to Report:
The Information and Privacy Commissioner
 
WHEN to Report:
At the first reasonable opportunity.
 
 
5.PRIVACY BREACHES: BY NON-REGULATED HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
WHAT to Report
The discipline, suspension, or termination of employment of an individual, other than a regulated health care provider because of unauthorized collection, use, disclosure, retention, or disposal of personal health information.
 
WHO Must Report
Health Information Custodians (Including physiotherapists who are HICs).
 
WHERE to Report: The Information and Privacy Commissioner
 
WHEN to Report: At the first reasonable opportunity
6.ANNUAL REPORT- PRIVACY BREACHED
WHAT to Report
A statistical report setting out the number of times in the previous calendar year that personal health information was stolen, lost, used without authority, or disclosed without authority.
 
WHO Must Report Health Information Custodians (Including physiotherapists who are HICs).
 
WHERE to Report: The Information and Privacy Commissioner
WHEN to Report: March 1 of each year.
 
 
 
7.DISCLOSURE TO PREVENT HARM
WHAT to Report The Personal Health Information Protection Act, 2004 (PHIPA) permits the disclosure of personal health information to prevent harm in some circumstances and eliminate or reduce significant risk of serious bodily harm to themselves of others.
The following circumstances may warrant the disclosure of information to reduce or eliminate risk of harm:
• An identifiable person or a group of persons;
• Serious bodily harm or death; and
• the danger is imminent.
 
WHO Must Report:
Physiotherapists and other regulated health care providers
 
WHERE to Report:
The appropriate authority(ies), (e.g., Ontario Provincial Police (OPP))
 
WHEN to Report:
Immediately on becoming aware of the information.
 
 
Privacy
About privacy Breach
• Health Information Custodians must notify the affected person at the first reasonable opportunity, mentioning that a complaint may be made to the information and privacy commissioner of that province. For instance, if health information of patients sends to individuals not involved in patient care
• The agents of health information custodians must let their employers know as early as possible and make sure that the breach is contained.
• Disciplinary action can include suspension or termination of employment
• College must be notified with in 30 days of an action.
• The information and privacy commissioner must be notified if you have reasonable ground to prove that a breach has occurred.
What are the types of breach?
1. Loss of information
2. Using information without authority and using it after  initial breach
 
When to notify the college about a breach?
The PHIPA requires the custodian to notify a college if a member is terminated, suspended or subject to disciplinary actions because of the breach.
According to PHIPA act the health information custodian must report statistics of health privacy breach annually to the information and privacy commissioner of that province.
 
Consent to share health information is not required in the following situations
• In an emergency
• In a legal proceeding
• When records are released to a regulatory college
The following parties do not require consent to access patient records
• The patient or their authorized representatives
• The health care custodian or an agent who is involved in the patient care
• In private care facilities it includes any healthcare professionals selected by the patient
• Lawyers, insurance company, researchers for a study are not considered as custodians
 
 
 
 
 
Draping
 
Important:
Going to a physiotherapist can feel scary for many patients. They often have to undress and wear a gown that may not fit well, which can make them feel vulnerable. As a physiotherapist, it's important to remember that many patients are not comfortable.
Draping Pointers
Proper draping is important for patient care. There is no gold standard for draping. We have to adjust according to the needs of the patient.
Explain Before You Touch and take Consent: Always tell the patient what you will do and which areas need to be exposed.
Maintain Privacy: Use draping to cover as much of the patient’s body as possible while exposing only the necessary areas. Keep any exposed areas uncovered for the shortest time necessary to reduce discomfort. Use pillows or other items to create physical space between you and the patient, reducing unnecessary contact.
Use Secure Draping: Ensure that sheets or blankets are secure and won’t slip during the session.
Give Control: Allow patients to hold or adjust the drape themselves for added comfort and a sense of control.
Check for Comfort: Regularly ask the patient if they are comfortable and warm, and adjust the draping as needed. The patient should be at comfortable temperature.
Be Mindful of Cultural Sensitivity: Understand that different patients may have varying preferences regarding modesty, and respect those differences.
Age and Gender- Draping should be done in same manner for everyone except if there is cultural differences.
Respect
By following these draping guidelines, physiotherapists can help ensure a respectful and comfortable experience for the patients.
 
 
 
 
 
Virtual Practice
• Virtual practice relates to all aspects of Patient care including, Assessment, Diagnosis, Treatment, Maintenance activities, Consultation, Education, Training. Virtual practice also known as tele- rehabilitation, meaning delivery of professional physiotherapy service at a distance, using technology as a service delivery system.
• Registration requirements – PT must be registered with the same province that PT is currently delivering care virtually to that province patient.
• In virtual Physiotherapy treatment college’s code of ethics should be followed by Physiotherapist. PT should be aware about and also complied with the privacy legislation including virtual practice. Including Personal health information protection act.
• Physiotherapist must take informed consent for Virtual practice. Patient in virtual practice can stop the treatment anytime they like, patient have choice to refuse treatment.
• PT should also take consent if involving the PTA or student in the virtual care. PTA can be involved in virtual care. PTA should be competent enough to deliver care and able to contact PT anytime and also Alternate supervisor OR PT in case of incident.
• PT also confirms that insurance providers are covering the cost of virtual practice. It is also necessary that PT have liability insurance if delivering care virtually or in-person, for each location PT is working.
• PT should prepare their self for any adverse event such a medical emergency for patient while on PT session virtually to call 911 and provide patients address so they could get help on time.
• PT should aware about regulations of data storage and data access in case of choosing platform for virtual care if they meet the requirements of PHIPA and PIPEDA or not.
• PT should maintain patient record and charting regardless care is done in person or virtually, PT should also include patient video or audio session in patient records and also take consent to first record. If PT forgot to enter as a virtual session in invoice due to standard format of invoice than add not in patient chart.
• PT with other province registration can provide care to patient in Ontario, In case of with that treatment pt. will benefit and PT fulfill the standards of home province and the province they are serving the patient.
As PT, to choose vendor platform for virtual care, Ontario health provided virtual visits solution standards that ensure this vendors and custodian deliver secure virtual health care.
• PT should educate patient regarding limitation of virtual care, possible chances of privacy breach and technical malfunctions in regards to using virtual platform and take consent and document conversation in the patient records.
• Custodian should use encrypted email and messaging services while communicating with patient to ensure that all information is reaching to right recipient. PT should use two different channels like email and text message to confirm that it reached to correct person.
• All email and phone calls happened during the rehabilitation time period to take information from patient could be take time to be done and it comes with charge.
 
 
PROVIDING AND REFUSING CARE
 
Physiotherapists must not make decisions about providing care based on discriminatory reasons.
For example:  Age, citizenship, ethnicity, race, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, marital or family status.
 
When a patient needs physiotherapy, a physiotherapist who wants to discontinue care must ensure that one or more of the following conditions are met:  
 
• Patient requests the discontinuation.
• Alternative services have been arranged.
• Patient has been given a reasonable opportunity to arrange alternative services
• Physiotherapist is unable to provide care that meets the standards of practice because there are not enough resources available.
• Patient has failed to pay for physiotherapy services received within a reasonable time, and all reasonable attempts made by the physiotherapist to facilitate payment have been unsuccessful. • Physiotherapist believes that the patient may become abusive.
• Patient has not cooperated or complied with the treatment plan and the result is that the care is not effective.
• A professional boundary has been breached and all reasonable steps have been taken to manage the behaviour.
 
 
 
 
SUPERVISION
 
 
 
PT Student
PT Assistant
PT Resident
Who is responsible for patient care and safety?
Supervising Physiotherapist
Supervising Physiotherapist
Supervising Physiotherapist and PT Resident
Supervisor’s name must appear on invoice
YES
YES
NO
Chart entries must be co-signed
YES
NO
NO
Can perform delegated Controlled Act
(if Supervisor is rostered)
*YES, if PT supervisor is rostered too
NO (exception admin of a substance and suctioning)
YES, if supervisor is rostered too
Supervisor requires 3 years of registration with CPO holding Independent Practice Certificate?
NO
NO
YES
Must notify College of Physiotherapists of Ontario of Supervisor Role
NO
YES (indicate in PT portal)
YES (must complete Supervisor agreement and
be approved)
Maximum Number of Student/PTA/PT residents allowed
No maximum
No maximum
3
Requires patient consent
to be involved with care
YES
YES
YES
Can perform assessment and re-assessment
YES
NO
YES
 
• Supervisors have a duty to ensure that PT students they are overseeing have the knowledge, skills, and judgement to assess and deliver, safe and quality care to patients
• Initially the supervisor must directly observe the student’s performance and determine their level of competence when the student is learning a new skill.
 
Q- New PTA appointed and PT explained about US and next day asked PTA to do it for a patient Does PTA needs supervision and if yes to what extent ?
1. Can supervise from far and give verbal instructions
2. Set up parameters and from afar supervise
3. Watch the PTA to perform US
 
Physiotherapists may delegate the controlled acts to Physiotherapy students may perform any of the controlled acts that physiotherapists are authorized to perform as part of their training to become a member of the profession
WHEN THE PHYSIOTHERAPIST :-
• is confident that the physiotherapy student has the knowledge, skills, and judgment to perform the controlled act as assigned
• • have the patient's consent
• • provide an appropriate level of supervision to ensure safe and effective care 
• they are authorized to perform except for:
Acupuncture
Communicating a diagnosis
Spinal manipulation
Internal assessment or internal rehabilitation of pelvic musculature
THAT MEANS delegate their authority to another person (an assistant or an occupational therapist, for example) for three activities only: tracheal suctioning, administering a substance by inhalation, and wound care
 
• While the College requires PT Residents to be supervised by a physiotherapist holding an Independent Practice Certificate for three years, there is no such requirement to supervise a physiotherapy student
• A physiotherapy student can provide a physiotherapy assessment and treatment virtually as long as their PT supervisor has confidence that the student has the knowledge, skills, and judgement to do so safely and competently.
• IF A PTA IS COMPETENT AND WORKING WITH A PHYSIO FOR 5 YEARS AND PHYSIO FEEL CONFIDENT ABOUT SKILLS OF PTA THAN NO SUPERVISION IS ALLOWED
 
Q- Supervising PT assigns task of PROM for a patient to his PTA who are working from long time and physio feel so confident how does a PT supervise
1 Review PROM as it is different for every patient
2. Allow PTA to do PROM without reviewing
3 Allow PTA to do PROM and decide the number of repetitions as per patients pain level
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indigenous Cultural Safety, Health Equity, & Anti-Discrimination guide
 
• The College of Physiotherapists of Alberta acknowledges the distinct history and the unique relations between Indigenous Peoples and federal and provincial governments, established through Treaty and enshrined in the Canadian Constitution Act (1982)
• The term Indigenous Peoples is used to refer to all Inuit, First Nations, and Metis Peoples
 
1. Standard:
The physiotherapist demonstrates cultural humility and strives to provide culturally safe physiotherapy services when working with Indigenous clients.
 
2. Expected Outcomes:
Indigenous clients can expect that the physiotherapist will demonstrate respect and seek to understand the client’s values, beliefs, and identity, incorporating this understanding into all aspects of physiotherapy service delivery.
 
3. Performance expectations:
i. Reflective Practice---The Physiotherapist:
• Reflects on, identifies, and does not act on any stereotypes or assumptions they may hold about Indigenous Peoples.
• Reflects on how their privileges, biases, values, belief structures, behaviours, and positions of power may impact the therapeutic relationship with Indigenous clients.
• Evaluates and seeks feedback on their own behaviour towards Indigenous Peoples
 
ii. Building Knowledge Through Education---The Physiotherapist:
• Participates in ongoing education on Indigenous healthcare, determinants of health, cultural safety, cultural humility, and anti-racism.
• Learns about the negative impact of Indigenous-specific racism on Indigenous clients accessing the health-care system, and its disproportionate impact on Indigenous women and girls and two-spirit, queer, and transgender Indigenous Peoples.
• Learns about the historical and current impacts of colonialism on Indigenous Peoples and how this may impact their healthcare experiences.
• Learns about the Indigenous communities located in the areas where they work, recognizing that languages, histories, heritage, cultural practices, and systems of knowledge may differ between Indigenous communities.
• Learns about different types of trauma and their impact on Indigenous clients, including how intergenerational and historical trauma affects many Indigenous Peoples’ health and health-care experiences.
 
iii. Anti-Racist Practice----The Physiotherapist:
Takes appropriate action when they observe others acting in a racist or discriminatory manner towards Indigenous Peoples by:
▪ Helping colleagues to identify and eliminate racist attitudes, language, or behaviour.
▪ Supporting clients, colleagues and others who experience and/or report acts of racism.
▪ Reporting acts of discrimination to leadership and other appropriate authorities.
 
 
iv. Creating Safe Health-Care Experiences----The Physiotherapist:
• Treats clients with respect and empathy by:
− Acknowledging the client’s cultural identity.
− Listening to and seeking to understand the client’s lived experiences.
− Treating clients and their families with compassion.
− Being open to learning from the client and others.
• Cares for a client holistically, considering their physical, mental/ emotional, spiritual, and cultural needs.
• Acknowledges and incorporates into the plan of care Indigenous cultural rights, values, and practices, including ceremonies and protocols related to illness, birth, and death, that are meaningful to the client, where able.
• Facilitates the involvement of the client’s family and others (e.g., community and Elders, Indigenous cultural navigators, and interpreters) as needed and requested.
 
v. Relational Care----The Physiotherapist:
• Respectfully learns about the client and the reasons the client has sought physiotherapy services.
• Engages with clients and their identified support persons to identify, understand, and address the client’s health and wellness goals.
• Actively supports the client’s right to decide on their course of Care
Communicates effectively with clients by:
− Providing the client with the necessary time and space to share their needs and goals.
− Providing clear information about the health-care options available, including information about what the client may experience during the health-care encounter.
− Ensuring information is communicated in a way that the client can understand.
 
vi. Strengths-Based and Trauma-Informed Practice--The Physiotherapist:
• Works with the client to incorporate their personal strengths that will support the achievement of their health and wellness goals.
• Recognizes the potential for trauma (personal or intergenerational) in a client’s life and adapts their approach to be thoughtful and respectful of this, including seeking permission before engaging in assessments or treatments.
• Recognizes that colonialism and trauma may affect how clients view, access, and interact with the health-care system.
• Recognizes that Indigenous women, girls, and two-spirit, queer, and Trans Indigenous Peoples are disproportionately impacted by Indigenous-specific racism in the health-care system and consider the impact gender-specific trauma may have on the c
 
 
 
 
 
Strategies to Support Patients at Risk – Suicide, Abuse and Mental Health Challenges
If a patient discloses abuse, self-harm, or suicidal thoughts, be prepared to stop your assessment or treatment and address the comments.
You need to maintain confidentiality of capable patients unless there is a significant risk of harm to the patient or others. In that case, your duty to warn (keep others safe) may supercede your need to obtain consent. 
As a physiotherapist, it’s important to notice red flags, offer information about resources and supports, and refer the patient to the appropriate professional.
• Mental health crisis lines are excellent resources and can provide guidance on how best to proceed if you are concerned about a patient.
• 9-8-8: Suicide Crisis Helpline
• CAMH Crisis Resources
• Ontario 211
• Document the relevant information and actions taken in the clinical record, including only the critical details. For example: “Patient commenting that they are contemplating suicide, phoned crisis line together with the patient, patient agrees to follow up with family physician today.” Be prepared to redact these details if a third party asks for a copy of the clinical record and the notes do not relate to an insured injury.
• Stay within your scope of practice as a healthcare professional by responding to concerning comments, asking a few probing questions, and then deciding on your course of action. Depending on the scenario, the course of action might be to offer resource information, contact a family member or physician, or even to call 911 in extreme cases. 
Best Practices
• Don’t ignore concerning comments. Be human, empathetic, and indicate your concern. For example: “That sounds very stressful, and I’m really concerned about you.” You may be the only health professional the patient feels comfortable disclosing this information to.
• Ask your patient some probing questions to get more information about the degree of danger present.
• If you are in the middle of a hands-on technique when a patient makes a disclosure that causes you concern, be aware of how touch can be impactful and be careful of the effect on your patient if you suddenly take your hands off them after the disclosure. 
• Capable adults have the right to make their own choices, even if that means remaining in an abusive relationship. Offer your patient resources for support services if they are open to it.
• Involve your patient in your action plan whenever possible to foster trust. For example, say: “I’m really concerned about your safety, I’m going to get the number for the suicide hotline and we’ll call them together for some advice.”
• Suggest to your patient that you’d like to create a team to support them. Connect with a counsellor, physician, social worker, or psychologist to ensure all of their needs are addressed by the right professional with the right skills. 
• Follow-up with patients who stop therapy mid-session, leave and cancel sessions.
 Patients Under 18
the age of protection was raised to include youth up to 18-years-old.
Youth who are 16 and 17-years-old are now eligible to receive protection services from Children’s Aid Societies.
While reporting for 16 and 17-year-old children is not mandatory, please contact your local Children’s Aid Society if you have concerns a
All health care providers, including physiotherapists, must understand the importance of protecting a patient's privacy.
 
Ontario's privacy laws allow patients to have control over who has access to their personal health information.
 
If a physiotherapist has reasonable grounds to believe a patient may seriously harm themself, or others, the Personal Health Information Protection Act (PHIPA) permits this disclosure without getting the patient's consent. 
 
The physiotherapist is expected to use their professional judgment when assessing the situation to determine if there are reasonable grounds to believe serious harm will occur and if it is appropriate to disclose this information. 
 
The courts have set out circumstances in which concern for public safety may warrant the disclosure of information by a healthcare provider to reduce or eliminate risk of harm. The factors for consideration are:
• there is a clear risk to an identifiable person or a group of persons
• there is a risk of serious bodily harm or death and
• the danger is imminent
• the PT should use their best judgment to determine who would be the most appropriate person to contact. 
 
Depending on the situation, a family member or the patient's family doctor or mental healthcare provider would be appropriate. In some urgent cases, it may be more appropriate to call 911 for emergency services. 
 
If the physiotherapist is uncertain as to whether disclosure should be made, they should contact a lawyer or the Information and Privacy Commissioner.

Important: All disclosures should be documented in the patient chart
 
 
 
 
 
Urgent care vs Non-urgent care - Things to consider
 
Urgent conditions examples:
• Patient is experiencing neuromuscular dysfunction or pain.
• Situation where inability to initiate care or withdrawal of care would lead to significant deterioration of patient’s condition. Patient is at risk first imminent hospital admission or re-admission.
• Post-op care immediately following surgery
• Essential functional mobilization during in-patient care to prevent delay discharge
• Follow up post-discharge patients to ensure safe return to home and prevent re-admission to the hospital.
• Patient with burns that are incapacitating nature.
• Essential services and optimum care is provided in acute care settings or any other setting to help patients return to work safely as soon as possible.
• Cardio respiratory care/tracheal suctioning for newly acquired acute illness or acute exacerbation.
• Post ventilation and rehabilitation phases for patients with COVID-19.
 
When considering urgent and non-urgent care it is important to ensure the mode of delivery of care.
Physiotherapist must be sure they are competent to use the technology to deliver care and communicate effectively with patients during a session.
See the table below when to consider urgent or non-urgent care.

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Infection Prevention and Control
Physiotherapists must use current and generally-accepted infection prevention and control measures that are relevant to their practice setting. This requires physiotherapists to:
● maintain current knowledge of infection prevention and control measures,
● consider the risks of transmission among patients, self, other health professionals, and staff before each patient interaction,
● incorporate the appropriate infection prevention and control measures based on the risks of transmission,
● ensure that there are appropriate written infection prevention and control protocols in their practice setting.
Current and generally-accepted infection prevention and control measures include, but are not limited to:
● hand hygiene
● use of personal protective equipment (e.g. gloves, gowns, masks, respirators)
● cleaning, disinfecting and/or sterilizing equipment appropriately
● not re-using single-use equipment (e.g. single-use electrodes)
● safe management and disposal of waste and sharps
● any other additional measures that may be necessary, such as single room treatment areas or safe handling of soiled linen
Some Examples:-
1.For Acupuncture:
· Storage of needles in a clean and dry area
· Needles should be disposed in sharp container
· Alcohol can be used for skin prep for acupuncture
2.For Pelvic floor:
· Gel should not be reused, it means there should always be a closed sterile package.
· There should be proper policies and procedure to handle body fluids.(Spill Kit)
· Bleaching can be used to disinfection
· Use of proper PPEs Gloves gowns etc.
· Policies for proper donning and doAing should be in place.
3. For disinfection lowe level disinfection is used.
4. Adhesive electrodes are used only once
5. The ultrasound head should be cleaned every time
6. We can refill the gel bottles(for US and TENS) but they need to be washed and disinfected
7. Vaccination also comes in health safety applicable to healthcare workers
8. Water bottles should be cleaned and disinfected once daily and to be kept outside the treatment area.
9. Alcohol-based hand rubs should be used at several places.
10. Do not recommend that patients bring their gel for pelvic floor examination unless it is a sterile package.
11. Pictures and procedures can also be posted on the walls to regularly remind you for infection control. Eg: Hand washing techniques.
 
Equipment Maintenance
Physiotherapists must ensure that the equipment they use to provide patient care is properly maintained and safe. This means ensuring that the equipment is inspected, maintained, and serviced according to the health facility’s policies, manufacturers’ guidelines, and legislative requirements.

Physiotherapists must have a written process for routinely reviewing the maintenance and safety of the equipment they use, and be able to demonstrate that they did the review.
 
 
Questions:
Q:- You and your PTA are working together with patients in a hospital. Your PTA found out that one of the patients is HIV positive. While disposing of the linen your PTA wants to separate the linen of HIV patient to wash them separately. What would be the most appropriate response? A. Tell PTA that it is the right thing to do for infection control  
B. Tell them there is no need to separate the clothes.
C. Tell them to separate the clothes only if they are heavily soiled with blood and other body fluids.
D. Tell them that you do not know and that whatever they are doing is good.
Answer:- C All used linens are considered contaminated and should be handled with care. Those used by someone with HIV or hepatitis pose no more of a risk than any other. Neither Organism is transferred from linens, but rather from blood. For linens that are heavily soiled with blood and fluids, you are best to dispose of excessive soiling in the toilet and you may wish to separate these. Check with the company that does your laundry regarding their preference when handling these.
 
Q:- What precautions would you use if you suspect a patient had a bed bug infestation in the house ad concerned about controlling the spread?
A. Discontinue the treatment because it can spread through clothes
B. Continue the regular treatment without any precautions as it do not spread through clothes. C. Continue the treatment with precautions, Wraping a disposable wrap on the treatment table and booking their appointments at the end of the day.
D. Ask the patient not to tell this to other staff members and continue treatment because you have to meet the monthly target of patients
Answer:- C Bed bugs usually do not travel on the clothes of people. They usually hide in seams of mattresses during the day and come out to feed at night. Routine practice should be sufficient. If you are concerned, you can ask the pt to come at the end of the day and have a plastic cover over the plinth that can be discarded and vacuum the surface thoroughly after the patient has left.
 
 
 
Ethics Questions:
1) A Registered PT moved from Ontario to BC and got a job in a clinic. She has 2 PTAs for her regular clinical hours. The therapist is waiting for approval from the BCPT regulations and started her regular work in the clinic. According to the scenario, can PT work with PTA?
A. Yes, she can work. She is a registered PT.
B. Yes, she can work. She got the Job.
C. Yes, she will be once she gets the approval and her name will be listed on the public register.
D. Yes, she will once she gets the approval from the BC, PT regulation.
 
ANS: C
A physiotherapist who works with a physiotherapist assistant must be listed as doing so on the Public Register. (Same province)
 
2) A PT working in LTC, has a son who, recently passed the physiotherapy clinical exam and wants to start his career but before that, he needs some guidance and support from another PT, so he asked his mother if can he join LTC with her so he can learn better. What mother PT can take a stand here?
A. Yes, you can join but need to submit your resume to the management.
B. Yes, let's open the clinic so I can supervise you.
C. No, you need to find another workplace.
D. Yes, you can join but my co-worker PT will assign the work and supervise you.
 
ANS: D
A physiotherapist cannot assign care to or provide supervision for a relative* or a person with whom they have a close or intimate relationship.
 
3) During care, PT is not sure how to use vacuum therapy for a patient with LBP, he never used this kind of machine before, but the PTA knows and trained under another physiotherapist for 10 years. What PT can do?
A. PT can ask the PTA to perform the therapy and he can observe.
B. PT can read the manual, re-fresh the knowledge, and use it.
C. PT can avoid using vacuum therapy.
D. Vacuum therapy is contraindicated.
 
ANS: C
PT does NOT assign or Provide care, in which the physiotherapist does not have the knowledge, skills, and judgment to perform
But if he or she forgets how to use it, and already used the machine before they can check the manuals and use it.
 
 
4) On PTA's first day in the clinic, the PTA has 10 years of work experience and well-known references in her resume.  What PT can do and on the other day the PT will be changed due to shift change.
A. Current PT will check the competence of the PTA and watch the PTA while performing the task. On the second day, another PT will check her ability again.
B. Current PT will check the competence of the PTA and watch the PTA while performing the task. On the Second day, another PT can rely on co-workers' judgment and supervision.
C. Current PT will check the competence of the PTA and watch the PTA while performing the task. On the second day, another PTA will check her ability again.
D. No need to check her ability as she has a good work profile and experience.
 
ANS: B
• PT must ensure that the physiotherapist assistant has the knowledge, skill, and judgment to deliver safe and competent care.
• If another qualified person, for example, a PT co-worker or team member has evaluated the competence of the physiotherapist assistant, it is possible to rely on their judgment.
 
5) For communication purposes PTA asked for PT’s email add, PT frequently checks the text message if she is not available to receive the call. She is not so used to email. What PT will provide?
A. PTA asking for email then PT will provide email.
B. PT will try to check email and provide the email ass.
C. PT will give the phone number and ask PTA to text.
D. Pt will give her clinic's direct number for communication
 
ANS: C
there should be one contact method that the physiotherapist will check frequently. FAQ
 
6) What type of communication PT and PTA can use?
Text, email, sticky notes, communication book, phone, printed chart
It should be written.
 
 
7) PT will introduce, and explain the role and duties of PTA and obtain consent from the patient if PT will include PTA in the plan of care
 
8) If the patient complains about PTA, PT will discuss it with Pt and give options and also include PTA in the discussion. (think you are treating your family member then select the option according to the situation)
 
 
9) All-time PT presence is not required, at least PTA can be reached by communication.
If not then hire PT, cancel all appointments, or care plans, and supervise PT should be available when needed.
 
10) If the PTA provides actual treatment e.g. US therapy, or exercise supervision add the PTA name and job title to the patient’s invoice. No need to add the PTA name to the third-party payer while billing, but in the patient’s invoice yes.
 
11) The PTA supervises the PTA students and PTA students can write a care plan PTA can co-sign it.
 
 
12)  PTA can co-sign their notes, no need for PT. PT can monitor the chart report.
13) For O2 administration, PTA can do it if they are skilled and have the knowledge and judgment to do it.  
• any controlled act* that has been delegated to the physiotherapist
eg. If GP delegated to the PT controlled act.
Controlled Act:
Physiotherapists who perform controlled acts under their own authority must roster for each of these activities with the College. These include:
• tracheal suctioning
• spinal manipulation
• acupuncture (including dry needling)
• treating a wound below the dermis
• pelvic internal exams (this includes putting an instrument, hand, or finger, beyond the labia majora, or beyond the anal verge)
• administering a substance by inhalation
14) PTA does not do an assessment, re-assessment, POC, diagnosis, prognosis, interpretation, or give any rationales to patients.
15) PTA can assist PT in POC and collect data, PT can use that data and discuss POC with PTA as well.
16) PT does not assign the duty or part of the treatment plan to which he/she needs judgment. eg.  If the patient is in Phase 1 and now it’s time to decide whether to continue Phase 1 or progress to Phase 2. ( Try to remember what you are doing in a clinic set up when you are PTA)
 
17) PTA does not work with the patient if the physiotherapist is no longer involved in client care. PTA does not work without any direct or indirect supervision of PT.
 
 
 
 
 